---
layout: "/layouts/blog.njk"
name: "digitalisation"
tags: "randoms"
category: "Random Notes"
title: "Those Most Critical of Digital Technologies are Arguably the Very Reason Digitalisation Processes Fail"
published: "10 Sep 2022"
description: "There are many companies, researchers, and designers who genuinely want to create something great. Yet, they fail to engage with the critics constructively. Why we can't make it work with digitalisation processes?"
writer: ""
image: "/static/img/blogImage/13.jpg"
---

It has become quite fashionable to be against technology companies, to call computer scientists uncritical nerds obsessed with everything digital, and to be mad about the ever-growing obsession with digitalisation and proliferation of useless digital products. It is also very easy to call social scientists outdated and against innovation. Of course, there is no denying that there are evil companies, uncritical digitalisation plans, harmful projects, and painfully inflexible social scientists out there. But I have also come across many companies, researchers, and designers who genuinely want to create something great and are excited about knowing and addressing the harmful impacts of digitalisation. Yet, they fail to engage with the critics constructively.

I, myself, have been on both sides of the argument. My background is in social science and urban planning. For good seven years, I was heavily engaged with urban planning and decision-making theories. Then I got more into design and media studies in an effort to design digital technologies for those social and urban processes. I have worked with many computer scientists, product managers, techy nerds, and cool designers. I have gone mad at computer scientists and human-computer interaction (HCI) guys for their lack of critical thinking, and I have been at unease with social scientists' never-ending 'meh' attitude. I have also loved them both whenever I have seen them in their main element: an amazingly creative problem-solving of a product designer and a great analysis of social trends by a social scientist.

I have never hated either of them to the point that I would stop engaging with them. I have not loved one over the other that much, either that I would associate myself fully with it. The more it goes, the harder it gets for me to say who belongs to which field. Rather than their profession or educational background, I find it more appropriate to categorize people or projects based on their main problem-solving approach. I have encountered many product designers with a social scientist-y approach to problem-solving and many social scientists with a designer-ly way of thinking. However, one thing remains constant; drama is inevitable whenever these two ways of problem-solving collaborate on a project.
Being in the middle of the two approaches in a project is like being in the middle of your best friend's divorce drama; you love them both, and you know them well enough to know they are not bad people. You can see where the misunderstandings come from and understand why things do not go well. Yet, despite knowing the differences and problems, you secretly desperately want them to be together. Until now, I have been in enough of these dramas to be able to form a hypothesis about how the destructive cycle starts.

### In the Mind of a Digital Product Designer

A friend of mine is a product manager in an automotive company. To my complete shock, he loves Amazon! Every time we hang out and pass by an Amazon Fresh store, he goes on and on about how disruptive amazon has been and how it has managed to show us the irrelevancy or inefficiency of some of our services and structures. I, on the other hand, cannot stand the idea of Amazon. Our debates on whether Amazon is good or bad pretty much go exactly along the same lines and arguments as any discussion on tech and social impact. But he does not easily fit the profile of an uninformed, uncritical tech person. He is knowledgeable in philosophy, social theories, and politics and has a very progressive and critical attitude towards other social matters. I have other product managers and designer friends who are similar; they defend the ideas behind products and companies that are known to be socially 'harmful' while acknowledging the bad impacts they have had.

Whenever I go on and on about how unethical Amazon is, they all respond in the same line; maybe instead of constantly complaining, you can come up with a better solution that addresses those inefficiencies while ensuring public good, whatever that means. Then I go: these are giant companies; they have so much power and resources that no one can compete with them. And they go: these big companies had bigger competitors when they started; that's never a good excuse.

To be fair, I agree with them on this. Not everyone can come up with a solution, but everyone can at least try and, in doing so, learn more about the problem itself. In the past four years, I have extensively researched design philosophy and the 'designerly' way of thinking/problem-solving. At its face value, nothing about product design and designerly approaches is inherently evil or destined to become evil. In fact, product designers have many checkpoints in their process to ensure that what is designed is not harmful, irrelevant, or damaging. I know many of them that actively go beyond their way to find ways they can refute their design. If you dig deeper into design history, you realize that many of the greatest things that urban planners are proud of result from the 'designerly' way of thinking and not their strategic planning. I also applied and was shortlisted for two interviews for digitalization jobs in large private companies. They said they are desperate to find people with a social science background who know product design, but they often get very techy people applying for these roles.

So why things go wrong in collaboration between social scientists and tech designers was, for a while, the biggest mystery to me. Until I listened to an episode of 'product breakfast club' called "Are the designers at Facebook bad people?" The hosts, who are well-known product designers and product design advisors, said something very interesting about why understanding the impact of the product at times becomes an afterthought. It all has to do with their love of problem-solving! They are given a problem to solve by their client: increase the use of product X, diversify our consumer profile, and attract more people to the Y platform. As tech designers, they argued, they get so focused, excited, and driven to solve the problem that they often forget about their solution's impact. They are very cautious about what questions they are ready to tackle; if it's too obviously unethical, they won't get involved in solving it, but for those other problems that are more complex and their impacts are more nuanced, they just go with their gut feeling and try to do their best. The better they can solve the problem, the more fulfilled they feel.

Hearing that was the coin-dropping moment for me. My friend, who is obsessed with amazon, is not in awe of how Jeff Bezos is profiting from abusing the systems, the people, and the communities. Instead, he is in awe with how he looked at the problem and saw inefficiencies in our shopping experience that no one saw or was ready to tackle. Jeff Bezos for product managers is pretty much Ayn Rand for philosophers; undeniably brilliant and disruptive understanding of an issue with not-so-great solutions and outcomes. They might not be happy with how the outcome of their approaches has turned out to be, but no one can deny the brilliance of how they approach it.

Here is the first difference between a 'social scientist' and a 'designer': for a designer, it is easy to separate the problem space from the solution space. The wrong solution does not necessarily mean the wrong problem identification. Quite the opposite; a designer strives to find as many links as possible between problem space and solution space. For social scientists, these are inseparable, even though they claim this is not the case. Social scientists understand the problem space by exploring the solution space.

The general assumption is combining tech designers, and social scientists would be deadly amazing! Social scientists would be great in understanding and outlining problems, and product designers would be great in optimizing problem-solving approaches and harnessing the best of digital technologies. I have lost count of projects that started with this assumption but failed to deliver reasonable outcomes. The whole process either becomes the social scientists telling designers what they exactly want, reducing the role of designers to mere developers, or the techy people taking over and defining all the problems only from the lens of technology. For a long time, I was convinced that this is because computer scientists are entitled as, more often than not, they are the ones with huge funding. More recently, however, I realized that social scientists are equally problematic, if not more.

### In the Mind of a Social Scientist

It is hard to believe, but social scientists, urban planners, and practitioners in non-tech fields are really bad at defining problems and dealing with complexity. Why are they bad? Because the problem for social scientists cannot be separated from defining the 'contributing factors to that problem'. In saying what the problem is, they have already made up their mind about why the problem is. At times they get too fixated on why the problem exists, based on their field or expertise. They reduce the complexity of problems by narrowing down contributing factors and simplifying the connections between various aspects of a problem. They then spend much of their time creating the ideal image of what the solution might look like. But in defining the ideal image, they have already outlined what would lead us to that ideal image, the contributing factors, and who and what might stop us from getting to that ideal. There are two consequences to their obsession with this way of defining the problem.

Firstly they fail to address connections between their problem and other social scientists' problems. Even decades of introducing and reintroducing the system thinking theories have not changed the situation. For example, look at energy transition efforts; it's been almost a decade that energy transition experts have been looking for ways to integrate energy transition efforts with economic and political efforts; the same goes with urban planning and transport planning; sustainable agriculture, and clean energy; women's right and freedom of religion and belief. If you look critically into any of our current social endeavours, you can find similar contradictions or mismatches.

Take the reactions to the hottest day recorded in the UK. There is obviously a problem with our current patterns of behaviour that leads us to extreme climate catastrophes. The social scientist's mind results in statements like "you can't be pro car and love the environment". The designer's mind asks, "how about electric cars? Innovative materials that can replace cement?" This might sound contrary to what we often hear. Still, the potential of the designer's mind in capturing connections between various components of a system is way higher than social scientists because the designer can comfortably just observe a problem and deal with its complexity. Social scientists' minds cannot comprehend a problem without attempting to explain it.

Secondly, once social scientists and practitioners create that ideal picture in their minds, defining how we can get to that ideal picture becomes pretty much the embodiment of 'the end justifies the means.' This, at times, goes to the extreme of using some ridiculously contradictory approaches to get the outcome they want. They use the most undemocratic approaches to make people realize how important it is to respect democracy and alternative ways of thinking. They use platforms developed by giant tech companies in efforts to empower communities.
This is why tools are always in the background of social scientists' understanding of a phenomenon. Tools, in their totality, are neither the main enemy of social scientists nor the main friend. Tools are never totally good or totally bad. Tools 'fit' into processes; they never shape them. The narrative always is about how we can harness the benefits of the tools and reduce their negative impact, not even how we can design them.

It is almost mandatory for a social scientist to go with the narrative of 'guns don't kill, people do!' because accepting the idea of tools being inherently bad means fewer tools in their toolbox and, more importantly, it requires them to engage with developing technologies directly; working with or becoming the person they have often criticized. The very people who criticize the consequences of digital technologies and digitalisation processes can hardly associate any of those bad outcomes with the working mechanisms of the tool or its relation to the environment in which it is being used. Today, this is partly done by media studies scholars who work in between social science and technology design rather than social scientists.

Have you ever wondered why discussions on values in design, ethics in design, and value-sensitive design never found momentum in social science? If anything, these theories are right up the social scientists' alley. It is pretty much what they are fighting for. Yet, other than one or two examples of exploring how certain values are designed into tools, you rarely see those theories used in outlining social scientists' approach to technology and its use in social processes.

### When Social Scientists and Designers Work Together

When the two collaborate, social scientists often come to the table with the problem and the why; they explain the problem by saying what needs to change and how it needs to change. This instantly kills the joy for the designer as it hijacks the most enjoyable part of the project, exploring the problem. Then usually, what happens is designers, understandably or rightfully, ignore the social scientist's diagnosis of the problem and try to involve the social scientist in designing the solution (that famous co-designing part). I have been in many of these co-design sessions. To be effective, the participants need to have a good understanding of their processes. But since social scientists are too much into outcomes, the process is rarely something set in place or defendable. The process and everything involved for social scientists is always as good as the outcomes it produces, so they are really not bothered with exploring the ins and outs of the process itself.

The truth is that social scientists' view on the problem and solution spaces is unique and immensely helpful in developing digital tools and shaping digitalisation processes. Still, they rarely manage to make a valuable contribution as they rarely make an effort to experience the tech product development process.
