---
layout: "/layouts/blog.njk"
name: "hybrid"
tags: "randoms"
category: "Random Notes"
title: "Hybrid Meetings are Designed by Digital-Natives & Yet They Suck"
published: "23 Aug 2022"
writer: "Moozhan Shakeri"
image: "/static/img/blogImage/3.jpg"
---

Born out of pandemic necessity, hybrid (partly real-life and partly virtual) events are the new addition to the list of 'things we are not quite sure are fit for purpose, but we do them anyway, just because.' Like any other entry in that list, it comes with an elaborated backstory, justifying its existence: "the hybrid nature of the events ensures accessibility of the content to a wider audience and makes events more inclusive. They are scalable and cost-effective".

The reality of hybrid events, however, is far from this rosy picture of inclusivity and accessibility. No matter what you do, a portion of the audience feels neglected or excluded. There have been lots written about it already. So I will not write about what is bad about hybrid events, how they can be designed better, or how the gap between the virtual and the real can be bridged. What I want to write about is why this gap keeps appearing. Where we are now with technology and digital literacy is not anymore the case of your aged teacher struggling to make a PowerPoint work. These events are designed by digital natives; the generation brought up with digital media. So why do we constantly get digital technology wrong?

Here is my answer: There is something so fundamentally wrong about how we perceive digital media that makes bridging this divide undoable, if not impossible, and it all has to do with something called 'affordance.'

### Multiple Affordances of Digital Media

The concept of affordances was first introduced by Gibson in the 1960s and later defined by him in 1979 in the context of the natural environment:

> "The affordances of the environment are what it offers the animal, what it provides or furnishes, either for good or ill. The verb to afford is found in the dictionary, the noun affordance is not. I have made it up. I mean by it something that refers to both the environment and the animal in a way that no existing term does. It implies the complementarity of the animal and the environment."

Later in 1988, Donald Norman made the term popular in HCI and used it to refer to action possibilities available in an environment, particularly digital ones. Around 2011, when I was researching digital games, the term used to pop up in every book, article, or writing about new media. In a nutshell, affordances "is the relationship between the person and the object and what the person can do with an object." The concept is used to discuss how features of media or technology influence their actual and perceived functional capacity (things we can do with them) and how those functional capacities impact our living environment and, consequently us.

Ok, the concept has worked amazingly in understanding how the technologies, objects, tools, or media are designed but consciously or unconsciously, it has promoted a view of technology and media that is extremely problematic. In explaining the affordances, Norman assumes it is possible to associate each object's function with one or two of its features. For example, he holds a black barrel in front of him, and he says that because the barrel is light and does not let the light through, it enables him to hold it and hide behind it. The black barrel, therefore, has hiding affordances.

This all makes sense. Certain features of an object enable us to do certain things with that object. So what's problematic with it? The problem is I watch Norman holding the barrel and hide behind it and then conclude that all barrels have hiding affordance for all people, or the reason the barrel has hiding affordance is that it is black, or the reason Norman can hold the barrel is that the barrel is light as opposed to Norman being very strong. I might do extensive 'user' research to understand specific reasons why Norman can find hiding affordance in a barrel, but that would not be very helpful for designing products as it is a very specific use for a very specific user. So I might look into patterns; some people who have barrels use the barrel for hiding; they are often strong enough to hold the barrel.

By assuming that certain features are enablers of certain functions, you decompose a barrel as a whole object by defining its features and trying to explain how its different features in isolation or composition can enable certain functions. For example, Facebook can be defined by its different services (messenger, photo sharing, advertisement, groups, etc.), each of its services is provided by certain features, and people might use these services differently than intended based on how they perceive the service's functional capacity and added value.

### Where Does It All Go Wrong?

So, here is the problem. Such understanding of the relationship between technology and practices gives you this false assumption that you can have one service without others, one affordance in isolation from other ones. You can find pedagogic value in Facebook without getting engaged with the advertisement service. You can use Instagram purely for messaging with your friend and ignore the home page, page suggestions, explorer, and all other services it provides. This is particularly important when it comes to digital technologies and media. Digital media, by nature, have numerous features and multiple affordances. While you can focus on certain affordances, you cannot fully ignore the 'environmental' qualities created by the technology/media as a whole.

Let's return to the hybrid events. Event organisers want to increase the number of participants. Platforms such as Zoom, Discord, and Youtube all provide services for broadcasting. Event organisers also want participants to be able to interact with the speakers; ask questions, have discussions, etc.. from all the platforms, Zoom provides more comprehensive features to enable that; you can see hands raised in order, and you can have a private message as well as a group message and lots more. With all its features, it becomes a suitable platform for those looking for those functionalities. But Zoom is not just a non-digital platform with streaming and virtual engagement capabilities. In their totality, zoom and many other video communication platforms create an environment that is very different from the non-digital one.

Here are some examples of qualities video communication platforms produce in their totality. Qualities that cannot directly be linked to specific features but are the result of a complex interaction between the environment and the complex web of features. Video communication platforms have completely changed the speaker-audience dynamic and power relation. They allow the participants the liberty to become the centre of the stage and the speaker to be the background noise.

Participants can discuss things, express themselves or promote themselves while the speakers are talking in the chat box or simply disable the video and audio, wash dishes, swear at the speakers, or do whatever they want. On the surface, that might be controllable. You can disable chat during the talk, disable participants' interaction, etc.. Still, no matter what you do, this change of power relationship is part of the environment in which the platform is being used. In old school conferences, someone would tell you to be quiet if you talk too much with the people around you. Suppose you stand up and say I have done a similar project and start handing out your book during the speaker's speech. Someone would kick you out of the event because you are messing with the defined dynamic and power relation between participant and speaker.

Now get into hybrid events. The virtual space then will not be an extension of the setup and dynamic of the in-person meeting, made possible with features provided by Zoom. Instead, it will be a new environment created by a unique relationship between the virtual and real features and those involved. The same goes for all other engagements with digital or virtual technologies; introducing games into urban planning is not just adding playful elements to it, introducing Facebook groups to neighborhoud planning is not just facilitating the communication, and providing urban dashboards is not just making data more accessible and transparent.

Yet, as wrong as it might sound, we continue to imagine digital technologies as a collection of features that can extend reality or be used in isolation in our professional, social or personal engagements with digital media. We are happy to introduce complex and often contradictory environments digital technologies produce in our setting just because their certain features satisfy our needs. This is exactly what media ecologists warned us about in the 1960s. McLuhan, Postman, and Ong, who are among the most misunderstood scholars, provided exceptional insights into how media and technologies can be understood within their environment and as an environment.

Norman’s type understanding of relationship between technology and practice, while useful in designing products, deviates the attention from the bigger context of impacts (what media ecologists could perfectly analyse) to specific relationships between features and functions.
